Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Computer Network Lab (CS39006)
Mini Project 2: SimpleMail – A Command-Line Mail System
Overview
In this project, you will build a complete command-line email system from scratch using C socket
programming. The system consists of two programs: smserver (the SimpleMail server) and
smclient (the SimpleMail client). The server stores and manages mailboxes for registered users,
while the client connects to the server to send and retrieve mail. Communication between the client
and server follows two custom protocols defined in this document: SMTP2 (SimpleMail Transfer
Protocol 2) for sending mail, and SMP (SimpleMail Pickup Protocol) for retrieving mail. Both
protocols are text-based and operate over TCP.
The server listens on a single configurable port and distinguishes between SMTP2 and SMP
sessions based on a handshake at the start of each connection. The server must be capable of
handling multiple clients concurrently using select()/poll(). All mailboxes are stored as flat files
on disk.
Part 1: The Server: smserver
Startup and User Registry
The server is launched as follows:
./smserver <port> <userfile>
The userfile is a plain text file where each line contains a username and password separated by
a single space. Usernames are case-insensitive and consist only of lowercase alphabetic characters
(a–z), with a maximum length of 20 characters. Passwords are case-sensitive alphanumeric strings
with a maximum length of 30 characters. An example userfile might look like this:
alice secretpass1
bob hunter2
charlie x9Kp2mW
On startup, the server reads this file into memory. If the file is missing or malformed, the server prints
an error and exits. For each user, the server must ensure a mailbox directory exists. Mailboxes are
stored in a directory called mailboxes/ relative to the server's working directory, with one
subdirectory per user (e.g., mailboxes/alice/). Each email in a mailbox is stored as a separate
text file named with a monotonically increasing integer starting from 1 (e.g., 1.txt, 2.txt, etc.).
You must track the next available ID per user so that IDs never repeat, even after deletion.
Connection Handling
When a client connects, the server sends a greeting line:
WELCOME SimpleMail v1.0
The server then waits for the client to declare what kind of session it wants. The client sends either
MODE SEND or MODE RECV. The server responds with OK if it recognizes the mode, or ERR
Unknown mode if it doesn't. After mode selection, the connection follows the corresponding protocol
(SMTP2 for SEND, SMP for RECV). If the client sends no mode declaration within 30 seconds of
connecting, the server closes the connection.
Server Console Output
The server should print a log line to stdout for every significant event: a new connection, mode
selection, a mail being delivered, a mailbox being accessed, authentication success/failure, and
disconnection. The format is up to you, but every log line must be prefixed with a timestamp in the
format [YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS].
Part 2: SMTP2: The Sending Protocol
SMTP2 is used when the client has selected MODE SEND. This protocol allows the client to compose
and deliver a mail to one or more recipients on the server. There is no authentication required to
send mail; anyone can send mail to any registered user, but the server will reject mail addressed to
users who don't exist.
SMTP2 Session Flow
After mode selection, the client and server engage in the following dialogue. All commands and
responses are single lines terminated by \r\n. The maximum length of any single line in SMTP2 is
512 bytes including the terminator.
Step 1: Sender Declaration. The client sends a FROM command specifying the sender's display
name. This is a free-form string (not necessarily a registered user) that will appear in the "From"
header of the delivered mail. The format is:
FROM <display_name>
The display name can contain spaces and any printable ASCII characters. The server responds with
OK Sender accepted.
Step 2: Recipient Specification. The client sends one or more TO commands, each specifying a
registered username on the server:
TO <username>
For each TO command, the server checks whether the username exists in the user registry. If the
user exists, the server responds with OK Recipient accepted. If not, it responds with ERR No
such user. The client may send as many TO commands as it wishes. At least one recipient must
have been accepted before the client can proceed to the next step.
Step 3: Subject. The client sends a SUB command with the subject line of the mail:
SUB <subject_text>
The server responds with OK Subject accepted. The subject may be empty (i.e., the client
sends just SUB with nothing after it), in which case the subject is stored as "(no subject)".
Step 4: Body Transmission. The client signals the start of the mail body by sending the command
BODY. The server responds with OK Send body, end with CRLF.CRLF. The client then sends
the body of the email as multiple lines of text. To signal the end of the body, the client sends a line
containing only a single period (.). This is known as the dot-termination convention. If a line in the
actual body text starts with a period, the client must prepend an additional period to that line
(byte-stuffing), and the server must strip the leading extra period when storing the mail. The
maximum total size of the body after de-stuffing is 65536 bytes. If this limit is exceeded, the server
discards the body and responds with ERR Body too large.
Step 5: Delivery Confirmation. After the dot-terminator is received and the body is within size
limits, the server stores the mail in each accepted recipient's mailbox. Each stored mail file has the
following exact format:
From: <display_name>
To: <comma-separated list of accepted recipients>
Subject: <subject_text>
Date: <YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS>
---
<body text>
The Date field is the server's local timestamp at the time of delivery. The --- line separates
headers from the body. After successful storage, the server responds with OK Delivered to N
mailboxes where N is the count of accepted recipients. If no recipients were accepted (all TO
commands failed), the server instead responds with ERR No valid recipients when it receives
the BODY command, and does not accept body text.
Step 6: Session End. After delivery, the client may send another FROM command to start
composing a new mail within the same session, or it may send QUIT to end the session. The server
responds to QUIT with BYE and closes the connection.
At any point during the SMTP2 session, if the client sends a command that is out of sequence (e.g.,
sending BODY before any TO command, or sending SUB before FROM), the server responds with ERR
Bad sequence. The expected sequence is strictly: FROM → one or more TO → SUB → BODY →
(body lines) → dot → delivery, and then either a new FROM or QUIT.
Part 3: SMP: The Retrieval Protocol
SMP is used when the client has selected MODE RECV. This protocol allows the client to
authenticate as a registered user and then list, read, and delete mails in their mailbox.
SMP Authentication
Immediately after mode selection, the server sends:
AUTH REQUIRED
The client must then authenticate by sending its credentials in a single command using a simple
challenge-response scheme. When the server sends AUTH REQUIRED, it also appends a
space-separated random 8-character alphanumeric token called the nonce. So the full line from the
server looks like:
AUTH REQUIRED <nonce>
The client must respond with:
AUTH <username> <hash>
The hash is computed as follows: concatenate the password with the nonce (password first, nonce
second, no separator), then compute the DJB2 hash of the resulting string, and send the hash as
an unsigned decimal integer. The DJB2 hash function is defined as:
unsigned long djb2(const char *str) {
unsigned long hash = 5381;
int c;
while ((c = *str++))
hash = ((hash << 5) + hash) + c;
 /* hash * 33 + c */
return hash;
}
The server performs the same computation using the stored password for the given username and
compares the result. If the hashes match, the server responds with OK Welcome <username>. If
the username doesn't exist or the hash doesn't match, the server responds with ERR
Authentication failed. The client gets at most 3 attempts to authenticate. After 3 failures, the
server sends ERR Too many failures and closes the connection.
This challenge-response mechanism ensures that the raw password is never sent over the network.
SMP Mailbox Commands
After successful authentication, the client can issue the following commands in any order:
LIST: The client sends LIST and the server responds with a multi-line listing of all mails in the user's
mailbox. The first line of the response is OK <count> messages, where count is the number of
mails. Then, for each mail, the server sends one line in the format:
<id> <from_display_name> <subject> <date>
The fields are separated by a tab character (\t). After all listing lines, the server sends a line
containing only . (dot-termination, same convention as SMTP2). If the mailbox is empty, the server
sends OK 0 messages followed immediately by the dot line.
READ <id>: The client sends READ followed by a mail ID. If the mail exists, the server responds with
OK on the first line, then sends the entire contents of the mail file verbatim (using dot-stuffing for any
body lines starting with a period), terminated by a dot line. If the mail ID doesn't exist, the server
responds with ERR No such message.
DELETE <id>: The client sends DELETE followed by a mail ID. If the mail exists, the server deletes
it from disk and responds with OK Deleted. If it doesn't exist, the server responds with ERR No
such message. Deleted mail IDs are never reused.
COUNT: The client sends COUNT and the server responds with OK <count> where count is the
number of mails currently in the mailbox. This is a lightweight alternative to LIST when the client just
wants to know if there's new mail.
QUIT: The client sends QUIT and the server responds with BYE and closes the connection.
If the client sends any unrecognized command, the server responds with ERR Unknown command.
Part 4: The Client: smclient
The client is launched as follows:
./smclient <server_ip> <port>
Upon connecting and receiving the server greeting, the client presents an interactive menu to the
user:
Connected to SimpleMail server.
1. Send a mail
2. Check my mailbox
3. Quit
>
Sending a Mail (Option 1)
When the user selects option 1, the client initiates a MODE SEND session with the server. It then
prompts the user interactively for each field:
From (your name): _
To (recipient username, empty line to finish): _
Subject: _
Body (type '.' on a line by itself to finish):
_
The client collects multiple recipients by prompting repeatedly until the user enters an empty line. It
must ensure at least one recipient is provided before proceeding. The client handles the SMTP2
protocol dialogue transparently; the user never sees the raw protocol commands or responses.
Instead, the client displays friendly messages like "Mail delivered to 2 recipients." or "Error: user
'dave' does not exist on this server." After delivery, the client returns to the main menu. For this, the
client sends QUIT to close the SMTP2 session and the underlying TCP connection, then reconnects
fresh when the user picks another option.
Checking the Mailbox (Option 2)
When the user selects option 2, the client initiates a MODE RECV session. It prompts for the
username and password:
Username: _
Password: _
The client receives the nonce from the server, computes the DJB2 hash as described, and sends the
AUTH command. If authentication fails, the client informs the user and allows retrying (up to the
server's limit of 3 attempts). Upon successful login, the client displays a mailbox menu:
Mailbox for alice (3 messages)
1. List all messages
2. Read a message
3. Delete a message
4. Logout
>
The "List all messages" option issues a LIST command and displays the results in a clean tabular
format. The "Read a message" option prompts for a message ID and displays the full mail content.
The "Delete a message" option prompts for a message ID and confirms deletion. "Logout" sends
QUIT and returns to the main menu.
Part 5: Protocol Summary
For quick reference, here is a compact summary of all protocol commands.
SMTP2 commands (client → server): FROM <name>, TO <user>, SUB <subject>, BODY,
QUIT.
SMTP2 responses (server → client): OK ... for success, ERR ... for errors, BYE for session
end.
SMP commands (client → server): AUTH <user> <hash>, LIST, READ <id>, DELETE <id>,
COUNT, QUIT.
SMP responses (server → client): OK ... for success, ERR ... for errors, AUTH REQUIRED
<nonce>, BYE for session end.
Both protocols use \r\n as the line terminator and . on a line by itself as the multi-line content
terminator.
Part 6: Sample Execution Sequence
Below is a complete walkthrough showing exactly what the user sees in the terminal. Server-side log
output is shown separately.
Server Terminal
$ ./smserver 9000 users.txt
[2026-03-15 10:00:00] Server started on port 9000
[2026-03-15 10:00:00] Loaded 3 users from users.txt
[2026-03-15 10:00:22] New connection from 127.0.0.1:54312
[2026-03-15 10:00:22] Client selected MODE SEND
[2026-03-15 10:00:45] Mail delivered from "Alice Smith" to [bob] (1 recipient)
[2026-03-15 10:00:45] Client disconnected
[2026-03-15 10:00:52] New connection from 127.0.0.1:54320
[2026-03-15 10:00:52] Client selected MODE RECV
[2026-03-15 10:00:58] Authentication successful for user bob
[2026-03-15 10:01:05] User bob READ message 1
[2026-03-15 10:01:12] User bob DELETE message 1
[2026-03-15 10:01:15] Client disconnected
Client Terminal: Sending a Mail
$ ./smclient 127.0.0.1 9000
Connected to SimpleMail server.
1. Send a mail
2. Check my mailbox
3. Quit
> 1
From (your name): Alice Smith
To (recipient username, empty line to finish): bob
-> Recipient 'bob' accepted.
To (recipient username, empty line to finish): dave
-> Error: user 'dave' does not exist on this server.
To (recipient username, empty line to finish):
Subject: Meeting Tomorrow
Body (type '.' on a line by itself to finish):
Hi Bob,
Just a reminder about our meeting tomorrow at 3 PM.
Please bring the project report.
.
Mail delivered to 1 recipient.
1. Send a mail
2. Check my mailbox
3. Quit
> 3
Goodbye.
Client Terminal: Checking the Mailbox
$ ./smclient 127.0.0.1 9000
Connected to SimpleMail server.
1. Send a mail
2. Check my mailbox
3. Quit
> 2
Username: bob
Password: hunter2
Welcome, bob!
Mailbox for bob (1 message)
1. List all messages
2. Read a message
3. Delete a message
4. Logout
> 1
ID
 From
 Subject
 Date
---
 ----
 -------
 ----
1
 Alice Smith
 Meeting Tomorrow
 2026-03-15 10:00:45
1. List all messages
2. Read a message
3. Delete a message
4. Logout
> 2
Enter message ID: 1
From: Alice Smith
To: bob
Subject: Meeting Tomorrow
Date: 2026-03-15 10:00:45
---
Hi Bob,
Just a reminder about our meeting tomorrow at 3 PM.
Please bring the project report.
1. List all messages
2. Read a message
3. Delete a message
4. Logout
> 3
Enter message ID: 1
Message 1 deleted.
1. List all messages
2. Read a message
3. Delete a message
4. Logout
> 4
Logged out.
1. Send a mail
2. Check my mailbox
3. Quit
> 3
Goodbye.
Part 7: Wire-Level Trace
To remove any ambiguity, below is the exact sequence of bytes exchanged over the TCP connection
for the "send mail" session above. Each line ends with \r\n which is omitted here for readability but
must be present in your implementation. C: denotes data sent by the client and S: denotes data
sent by the server.
SMTP2 Session Trace
S: WELCOME SimpleMail v1.0
C: MODE SEND
S: OK
C: FROM Alice Smith
S: OK Sender accepted
C: TO bob
S: OK Recipient accepted
C: TO dave
S: ERR No such user
C: SUB Meeting Tomorrow
S: OK Subject accepted
C: BODY
S: OK Send body, end with CRLF.CRLF
C: Hi Bob,
C: Just a reminder about our meeting tomorrow at 3 PM.
C: Please bring the project report.
C: .
S: OK Delivered to 1 mailboxes
C: QUIT
S: BYE
SMP Session Trace
S: WELCOME SimpleMail v1.0
C: MODE RECV
S: OK
S: AUTH REQUIRED a3bK9xQ2
C: AUTH bob 7572886318025498
S: OK Welcome bob
C: LIST
S: OK 1 messages
S: 1​ Alice Smith​ Meeting Tomorrow​ 2026-03-15 10:00:45
S: .
C: READ 1
S: OK
S: From: Alice Smith
S: To: bob
S: Subject: Meeting Tomorrow
S: Date: 2026-03-15 10:00:45
S: ---
S: Hi Bob,
S: Just a reminder about our meeting tomorrow at 3 PM.
S: Please bring the project report.
S: .
C: DELETE 1
S: OK Deleted
C: QUIT
S: BYE
The hash value 7572886318025498 in the trace above is the DJB2 hash of the string
hunter2a3bK9xQ2 (password concatenated with nonce). You should verify this with your own
implementation of DJB2 as a sanity check.
Deliverables
You must submit the following: the source files smserver.c and smclient.c (additional helper
files are permitted), a Makefile that produces the two executables smserver and smclient, a
sample users.txt file with at least 5 users, and a brief README.md explaining your design choices
such as how you handle concurrency, how you manage mailbox file IDs, and any assumptions you
made.
Evaluation Criteria
Your project will be evaluated on correct implementation of both SMTP2 and SMP protocols as
specified (including edge cases like dot-stuffing, empty subjects, out-of-sequence commands, and
nonexistent users), proper use of TCP sockets and concurrent connection handling, robustness
against malformed input and partial reads, clean separation between protocol logic and user
interface in the client, code quality and readability, and the completeness of your README. Also the
server and clients for individual students should be compatible. Note that you might need further
assumptions/design requirements, which MUST be clearly stated in your README file and in your
code.